VI. Pearl.
We have as yet hardly spoken of the infant, that little creature whose innocent life had
sprung, by the inscrutable decree of Providence, a lovely and immortal flower out of the rank
luxuriance of a guilty passion.
How strange it seemed to the sad woman, as she watched the growth and the beauty that
became every day more brilliant, and the intelligence that threw its quivering sunshine over the
tiny features of this child.
Her pearl, for so had Tester called her, not as a name expressive of her aspect, which
had nothing of the calm, white, unimpassioned luster that would be indicated by the comparison.
But she named the infant Pearl, as being of great price, purchased with all she had, her
mother's only treasure.
How strange, indeed, man had marked this woman's sin by a scarlet letter, which had such potent
and disastrous efficacy that no human sympathy could reach her, save it were sinful like
herself.
God, as a direct consequence of the sin which man thus punished, had given her a lovely
child, whose place was on that same dishonoured bosom to connect her parent for ever with
the race and descent of mortals, and to be finally a blessed soul in heaven.
Yet these thoughts affected Hester Prynne less with hope than apprehension.
She knew that her deed had been evil.
She could have no faith, therefore, that its result would be good.
Day after day she looked fearfully into the child's expanding nature, ever dreading to
detect some dark and wild peculiarity that should correspond with the guiltiness to which
she owed her being.
Certainly there was no physical defect.
By its perfect shape, its vigor, and its natural dexterity in the use of all its untried limbs,
the infant was worthy to have been brought forth in Eden, worthy to have been left there
to be the plaything of the angels after the world's first parents were driven out.
The child had a native grace which does not invariably co-exist with faultless beauty.
Its attire, however simple, always impressed the beholder as if it were the very garb that
precisely became it best.
But little Pearl was not clad in rustic weeds.
Her mother, with a morbid purpose, that may be better understood hereafter, had bought
the richest tissues that could be procured, and allowed her imaginative faculty its full
play in the arrangement and decoration of the dresses which the child wore before the
public eye.
So magnificent was the small figure when thus arrayed, and such was the splendor of Pearl's
own proper beauty, shining through the gorgeous robes which might have extinguished a paler
loveliness, that there was an absolute circle of radiance around her, on the darksome cottage
And yet a russet gown, torn and soiled with the child's rude play, made a picture of her
just as perfect.
Pearl's aspect was imbued with a spell of infinite variety.
In this one child there were many children, comprehending the full scope between the wildflower
prettiness of a peasant baby, and the pomp, in little, of an infant princess.
Throughout all, however, there was a trait of passion, a certain depth of hue which she
never lost, and if in any of her changes she had grown fainter or paler, she would have
ceased to be herself, it would have been no longer Pearl.
This outward mutability indicated, and did not more than fairly express, the various
properties of her inner life.
Her nature appeared to possess depth, too, as well as variety, but, or else Hester's
fears deceived her, it lacked reference and adaptation to the world into which she was
born.
The child could not be made amenable to rules.
In giving her existence a great law had been broken, and the result was a being whose elements
were perhaps beautiful and brilliant, but all in disorder, or with an order peculiar
to themselves, amidst which the point of variety and arrangement was difficult or
impossible to be discovered.
Hester could only account for the child's character, and even then most vaguely and
imperfectly, by recalling what she herself had been during that momentous period, while
Pearl was imbibing her soul from the spiritual world, and her bodily frame from its material
of earth.
The mother's impassioned state had been the medium through which were transmitted into
the unborn infant the rays of its moral life, and, however white and clear originally, they
had taken the deep stains of crimson and gold, the fiery luster, the black shadow, and the
untempered light of the intervening substance.
Above all, the warfare of Hester's spirit at that epoch was perpetuated in Pearl.
She could recognize her wild, desperate, defiant mood, the flightiness of her temper, and even
some of the very cloud-shapes of gloom and despondency that had brooded in her heart.
They were now illuminated by the morning radiance of a young child's disposition, but, later
in the day of earthly existence, might be prolific of the storm and whirlwind.
The discipline of the family in those days was of a far more rigid kind than now.
The frown, the harsh rebuke, the frequent application of the rod enjoined by scriptural
authority, were used not merely in the way of punishment for actual offenses, but as
a wholesome regimen for the growth and promotion of all childish virtues.
Hester Prynne, nevertheless, the loving mother of this one child, ran little risk of erring
on the side of undue severity, mindful, however, of her own errors and misfortunes.
She early sought to impose a tender but strict control over the infant immortality that was
committed to her charge.
But the task was beyond her skill.
After testing both smiles and frowns, and proving that neither mode of treatment possessed
any calculable influence, Hester was ultimately compelled to stand aside and permit the child
to be swayed by her own impulses.
Physical compulsion or restraint was effectual, of course, while it lasted.
As to any other kind of discipline, whether addressed to her mind or heart, little Pearl
might or might not be within its reach in accordance with the caprice that ruled the
moment.
Her mother, while Pearl was yet an infant, grew acquainted with a certain peculiar look
that warned her when it would be labor thrown away to insist, persuade, or plead.
It was a look so intelligent, yet inexplicable, perverse, sometimes so malicious, but generally
accompanied by a wild flow of spirits, that Hester could not help questioning at such
moments whether Pearl was a human child.
She seemed rather an airy sprite, which, after playing its fantastic sports for a little
while upon the cottage floor, would flit away with a mocking smile.
Whenever that look appeared in her wild, bright, deeply black eyes, it invested her with a
strange remoteness and intangibility.
It was as if she were hovering in the air, and might vanish like a glimmering light,
that comes we know not whence, and goes we know not whither.
Beholding it, Hester was constrained to rush towards the child, to pursue the little elf
in the flight which she invariably began, to snatch her to her bosom with a close pressure
and earnest kisses, not so much from overflowing love as to assure herself that Pearl was flesh
and blood and not utterly delusive.
But Pearl's laugh, when she was caught, though full of merriment and music, made her mother
more doubtful than before.
Heart-smitten at this bewildering and baffling spell that so often came between herself and
her sole treasure, whom she had bought so dear, and who was all her world, Hester sometimes
burst into passionate tears.
Then, perhaps, for there was no foreseeing how it might affect her, Pearl would frown
and clench her little fist, and harden her small features into a stern, unsympathizing
look of discontent.
Not seldom she would laugh anew and louder than before, like a thing incapable and unintelligent
of human sorrow.
Or, but this more rarely happened, she would be convulsed with rage of grief and sob out
her love for her mother in broken words, and seem intent on proving that she had a heart
by breaking it.
Yet Hester was hardly safe in confiding herself to that gusty tenderness.
It passed as suddenly as it came.
Brooding over all these matters, the mother felt like one who has evoked a spirit, but,
by some irregularity in the process of conjuration, has failed to win the master word that should
control this new and incomprehensible intelligence.
Her only real comfort was when the child lay in the placidity of sleep.
Then she was sure of her, and tasted hours of quiet, sad, delicious happiness, until,
perhaps with that perverse expression glimmering from beneath her opening lids, little Pearl
awoke.
How soon, and with what strange rapidity indeed, did Pearl arrive at an age that was capable
of social intercourse beyond the mother's ever-ready smile and nonsense words.
And then what a happiness would it have been could Hester Prynne have heard her clear birdlike
voice mingling with the uproar of other childish voices, and have distinguished and unraveled
her own darling's tones amid all the entangled outcry of a group of sportive children.
But this could never be.
Pearl was a born outcast of the infantile world.
An imp of evil, emblem and product of sin, she had no right among christened infants.
Nothing was more remarkable than the instinct, as it seemed, with which the child comprehended
her loneliness.
The destiny that had drawn an inviolable circle round about her, the whole peculiarity in
short of her position in respect to other children.
Never since her release from prison had Hester met the public gaze without her.
In all her walks about the town, Pearl, too, was there, first as the babe in arms, and
afterwards as the little girl, small companion of her mother, holding a forefinger with her
whole grasp, and tripping along, at the rate of three or four footsteps, to one of Hester's.
She saw the children of the settlement on the grassy margin of the street, or at the
domestic thresholds, distorting themselves in such grim fashions as the puritanic nurture
would permit, playing at going to church, perchance, or at scourging Quakers, or taking
scalps in a sham fight with the Indians, or scaring one another with freaks of imitative
witchcraft.
Pearl saw and gazed intently, but never sought to make acquaintance.
If spoken to, she would not speak again.
If the children gathered about her as they sometimes did, Pearl would grow positively
terrible in her puny wrath, snatching up stones to fling at them with shrill, incoherent exclamations
that made her mother tremble, because they had so much the sound of a witch's anathemas
in some unknown tongue.
The truth was that the little puritans, being of the most intolerant brood that ever lived,
had got a vague idea of something outlandish, unearthly, or at variance with ordinary fashions,
in the mother and the child, and therefore scorned them in their hearts, and not infrequently
reviled them with their tongues.
Pearl felt the sentiment, and requited it with the bitterest hatred that can be supposed
to rankle in a childish bosom.
These outbreaks of a fierce temper had a kind of value, and even comfort for the mother,
because there was at least an intelligible earnestness in the mood, instead of the fitful
caprice that so often thwarted her in the child's manifestations.
It appalled her, nevertheless, to discern here again a shadowy reflection of the evil
that had existed in herself.
All this enmity and passion had Pearl inherited, by inalienable right, out of Hester's heart.
Mother and daughter stood together in the same circle of seclusion from human society,
and in the nature of the child seemed to be perpetuated those unquiet elements that had
distracted Hester Prynne before Pearl's birth, but had since begun to be soothed away by
the softening influences of maternity.
At home, within and around her mother's cottage, Pearl wanted not a wide and various circle
of acquaintance.
The spell of life went forth from her ever-creative spirit, and communicated itself to a thousand
objects as a torch kindles a flame wherever it may be applied.
The unlikeliest materials—a stick, a bunch of rags, a flower—were the puppets of Pearl's
witchcraft, and, without undergoing any outward change, became spiritually adapted to whatever
drama occupied the stage of her inner world.
Her one baby voice served a multitude of imaginary personages, old and young, to talk with all.
The pine trees, aged, black and solemn, and flinging groans and other melancholy utterances
on the breeze, needed little transformation to figure as Puritan elders.
The ugliest weeds of the garden were their children, whom Pearl smote down and uprooted
most unmercifully.
It was wonderful, the vast variety of forms into which she threw her intellect with no
continuity indeed but darting up and dancing, always in a state of preternatural activity,
soon sinking down, as if exhausted by so rapid and feverish a tide of life, and succeeded
by other shapes of a similar wild energy.
It was like nothing so much as the phantasmagoric play of the northern lights.
In the mere exercise of the fancy, however, and the sportiveness of a growing mind, there
might be a little more than was observable in other children of bright faculties, except
as Pearl, in the dearth of human playmates, was thrown more upon the visionary throng
which she created.
The singularity lay in the hostile feelings with which the child regarded all these offsprings
of her own heart and mind.
She never created a friend, but seemed always to be sowing broadcast the dragon's teeth
whence sprung a harvest of armed enemies against whom she rushed to battle.
It was inexpressibly sad, then what depth of sorrow to a mother, who felt in her own
heart the cause, to observe in one so young this constant recognition of an adverse world,
and so fierce a training of the energies that were to make good her cause in the contest
that must ensue.
Gazing at Pearl, Hester Prynne often dropped her work upon her knees, and cried out with
an agony which she would fain have hidden, but which made utterance for itself betwee
speech and a groan, O Father in heaven, if thou art still my father, what is this being
which I have brought into the world?
And Pearl, overhearing the ejaculation, or aware through some more subtle channel of
those throbs of anguish, would turn her vivid and beautiful little face upon her mother,
smile with sprite-like intelligence, and resume her play.
One peculiarity of the child's deportment remains yet to be told.
The very first thing which she had noticed in her life was, what, not the mother's smile,
responding to it as other babies do, by that faint embryo smile of the little mouth remembered
so doubtfully afterwards, and with such fond discussion whether it were indeed a smile,
by no means, but that first object of which Pearl seemed to become aware was, shall we
say it, the scarlet letter on Hester's bosom.
One day, as her mother stooped over the cradle, the infant's eyes had been caught by the glimmering
of the gold embroidery about the letter, and putting up her little hand, she grasped at
it, smiling, not doubtfully, but with a decided gleam that gave her face the look of a much
older child.
Then, gasping for breath, did Hester Prynne clutch the fatal token, instinctively endeavouring
to tear it away, so infinite was the torture inflicted by the intelligent touch of Pearl's
baby hand.
Again, as if her mother's agonized gesture were meant only to make sport for her, did
little Pearl look into her eyes and smile.
From that epoch, except when the child was asleep, Hester had never felt a moment's safety,
not a moment's calm enjoyment of her.
Weeks, it is true, would sometimes elapse, during which Pearl's gaze might never once
be fixed upon the scarlet letter, but then again it would come at unawares, like the
stroke of sudden death, and always with that peculiar smile and odd expression of the eyes.
Once this freakish, elvish cast came into the child's eyes while Hester was looking
at her own image in them, as mothers are fond of doing, and suddenly, for women in solitude
and with troubled hearts, are pestered with unaccountable delusions, she fancied that
she beheld, not her own miniature portrait, but another face in the small black mirror
of Pearl's eye.
It was a face, fiend-like, full of smiling malice, yet bearing the semblance of features
that she had known full well, though seldom with a smile, and never with malice in them.
It was as if an evil spirit possessed the child, and had just then peeped forth in mockery.
Many a time afterwards had Hester been tortured, though less vividly, by the same illusion.
In the afternoon of a certain summer's day, after Pearl grew big enough to run about,
She amused herself with gathering handfuls of wildflowers, and flinging them, one by
one, at her mother's bosom, dancing up and down like a little elf whenever she hit the
scarlet letter.
Hester's first motion had been to cover her bosom with her clasped hands, but whether
from pride or resignation, or a feeling that her penance might best be wrought out by this
unutterable pain, she resisted the impulse, and sat erect, pale as death, looking sadly
into little Pearl's wild eyes.
Still came the battery of flowers, almost invariably hitting the mark, and covering
the mother's breast with hurts for which she could find no balm in this world, nor knew
how to seek it in another.
At last, her shot being all expended, the child stood still and gazed at Hester with
that little laughing image of a fiend peeping out, or, whether it peeped or no, her mother
imagined it from the unsearchable abyss of her black eyes.
"'Child, what art thou?' cried the mother.
"'Oh, I am your little Pearl,' answered the child.
But while she said it, Pearl laughed, and began to dance up and down with the humorsome
gesticulation of a little imp, whose next freak might be to fly up the chimney.
"'Art thou, my child, in very truth?' asked Hester.
Nor did she put the question altogether idly, but for the moment, with a portion of genuine
earnestness, for such was Pearl's wonderful intelligence that her mother half doubted
whether she were not acquainted with the secret spell of her existence, and might not now
reveal herself.
"'Yes, I am little Pearl,' repeated the child, continuing her antics.
"'Thou art not, my child, thou art no Pearl of mine,' said the mother half playfully,
for it was often the case that a sportive impulse came over her in the midst of her
deepest suffering.
"'Tell me, then, what thou art, and who sent thee hither?'
"'Tell me, mother,' said the child seriously, coming up to Hester and pressing herself close
to her knees.
"'Do thou tell me?'
"'Thy heavenly father sent thee,' answered Hester Prynne.
But she said it with a hesitation that did not escape the acuteness of the child, whether
moved only by her ordinary freakishness, or because an evil spirit prompted her, she put
her small forefinger, and touched the scarlet letter.
"'He did not send me,' cried she positively, "'I have no heavenly father.'
"'Hush, Pearl, hush, thou must not talk so,' answered the mother, suppressing a groan.
"'He sent us all into the world.
He sent even me, thy mother.
"'Then, much more thee, or if not, thou strange and elfish child, whence didst thou come?'
"'Tell me, tell me,' repeated Pearl, no longer seriously, but laughing and
tapering about the floor, "'It is thou that must tell me.'
But Hester could not resolve the query, being herself in a dismal labyrinth of doubt.
She remembered, betwixt a smile and a shudder, the talk of the neighbouring townspeople,
who, seeking vainly elsewhere for the child's paternity, and observing some of her odd attributes,
had given out that poor little Pearl was a demon offspring, such as ever since old Catholic
had occasionally been seen on earth through the agency of their mother's sin, and to promote
some foul and wicked purpose.
Luther, according to the scandal of his monkish enemies, was a brat of that hellish breed.
Nor was Pearl the only child to whom this inauspicious origin was assigned among the
New England Puritans.